Test, test, test, test, test, test.
I'm talking to Dr. Robert Coles, and you're pointing out some... Is that the Jill Kremitz photo?
Yeah, that's the Jill.
That's in a new book that just came out.
That's right.
I devoured that book, and what a great photograph.
She sent me that, actually.
Is that at Saranac, I think?
No, that's in his home.
That's in his home.
Remarkable.
That's the bed he died in.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I didn't know that at all.
This is the profile in New York in the two parts.
There he is with me.
He was at LSU, and I was giving these lectures in Plenary O'Connor.
That's Raymond Carver, and this is Dr. Williams, whom I wrote my thesis on.
What's his first name?
William Carlos Williams.
Oh, that's William Carlos Williams.
I'm sorry I didn't recognize the photograph.
You did your thesis on Dr. Williams.
Yeah.
Very interesting.
My whole life follows from that, because that's when I decided on the medical school.
That's Bonhoeffer.
And those are some ordinary working people I worked with in Appalachia.
That almost looks like a Walker Evans photograph.
I know, but it isn't.
Or Dorothea Lange, marvelous.
This is Anna Floyd and Eric Erickson, both of whom I knew and worked with.
Dr. Floyd, marvelous.
And this is finally when she was not sick.
She was a very young woman there.
She was a young woman.
It was before she got lupus.
I mean, she died in the thirties, didn't she?
Thirty-nine.
Yeah.
And this is?
Seymour Valley.
And then also, written about A.G.
Orwell.
That's George Barron, and I was looking at the Diary of the Country Priest, a novel.
I have everything A.G.
did in first edition.
I love A.G.
One of my sons' no name is aging.
Really?
Yeah.
This is Walker Evans with Alex House.
He and I worked together as a photographer.
Wow.
You know who this is?
I don't.
That's Bruce Springsteen.
And you're holding the bottle of Jack Davis Black at the record show.
Yeah, right.
And what occasion is that?
Well, I was after one of his concerts, and he's a Percy fan, you know.
I didn't know that.
Oh, yeah.
That's amazing.
He's a Walker Percy fan.
That's truly amazing.
And Walker wrote him a letter, you know, before he died.
No, really.
Yeah.
Really.
I so wanted to interview Walker Percy, one of the great, great missions of my life.
I was never able to do it.
I wanted to get out of Louisiana even, and it just didn't come to pass.
But I met him once.
By the way, those were pictures of A.G., of four successive, you know, quick.
Pop, pop, pop, pop.
He died a young man, too, actually, didn't he?
Forty-five.
Yeah.
I loved A.G.s.
I love him.
I think this goes to the very heart of what I've been trying to do with my entire life, which is to figure out the nature of the way to figure out how children grow up and what matters to them and how they become adults and what it means to become an adult.
And my first work with children was when I was originally trained in pediatrics.
And I think I go into that in this book.
And I worked with kids who had polio and who had to face limitation of movement, even the possibility of death, because I worked also with children who had leukemia at a time when we did not have a cure for leukemia, as we do now, 80 to 90 percent of children.
who get leukemia will survive.
And it was in the midst of that kind of work actually that my career veered from pediatrics to child psychiatry because I was so moved by the moral testimony of those children under duress, facing life's hazards, if not the loss of their own life,
they became morally reflective in a way that was very surprising to me.
And that gave me a big deal of moral powers myself, prompting me to stop and think about matters that perhaps I otherwise had ignored.
And in a way connected with the kind of undergraduate education I had.
I was a student of Perry Miller's, who was
actually a tutor of mine, and his field was the Puritans in New England.
And he himself was the one who got me connected to William Powers Williams.
He admired his poetry.
And what I began to realize is that the kind of moral reflection that Perry Miller taught me to embrace
the kind of moral reflection that you find in Williams' poetry and prose, for that matter.
I was, in my own way, hearing from these children who were young, and not necessarily from well-educated families, but in a so-called quote-unquote existential situation, were suddenly becoming alive to what life
to life's mysteries and its disappointments, but also we're becoming in a way more thoughtful than I think a lot of us are, who enjoy good health and don't have to face some of the hazards of life as these children are facing them.
This kind of experience is something that I've never forgotten.
It's probably no accident that when I stumbled into Newby Bridges in New Orleans in 1960, which I'm always writing about, this little girl went through labs to get an education, that I heard from her the same kind of moral reflection.
And so, what I'm telling you is that basically I've had a lifelong interest in moral questions.
Going back to my undergraduate days, when I studied with a reading
I studied with a professor whose interest was moral reflection, as it has taken place in New England, in its ministers, in its theologians, in its professional people, in its writers, and its writers especially.
I reconnected in my clinical years, and I continue with this to this day as I work with children from a variety of circumstances.
My ears and my eyes, I think, are quick to respond to these moral questions.
This is probably why I'm so interested in Walker Persia and Franley O'Connor in Dorothy Day.
I worked in her soup kitchen when I was a medical student.
That's true, yes, I recognize that.
And, you know, I've written about, I think the side of me that has been interested in and written about writers such as Simone Weil and Dorothy Day and Walker Percy and Flannery O'Connor and William Krause Williams is the side of me who, as a child psychiatrist, is going to respond to children in this way, concentrating
less on their impulsivity and their emotional tensions that people like me usually concentrate on.
And I'm not saying we shouldn't, namely their struggles with sexuality and with aggression and whatever.
But in my case, I think I'm more interested in their moral struggles, have been for a long time.
and address them in my writing.
The Children of Crisis series was eight volumes, is that right?
There were five volumes of Children of Crisis and three volumes called The Inner Lives of Children, in which I had to deal with their moral and their political and their spiritual affiliations and ways of identifying themselves and their beliefs.
And for those, particularly the first five, you traveled virtually everywhere.
All over the country.
It was really an investigative… Investigative field work.
North and South, East and West, rich and poor, black and white, English-speaking and Spanish-speaking, boys and girls, all the whole range, rural and urban.
And my preparing for this interview, of course I managed to find a number of previous feature pieces that have been written about you.
And you had said, I think, after, this is it, I'm not writing anything for you.
I keep saying that.
I was going to say that to you right now, but this is it.
You know, right now I'm reading a lot of Bonhoeffers.
There's a collection.
I'd be surprised if I somehow didn't try to come to terms with this thinking, because what he struggled with is what we all struggle with.
Here was a man of decency who was challenged by Hitler.
What do you do?
Who stands up to evil?
I think very few of us.
are going to be willing to take on evil when it controls the state apparatus, the police, the military.
And there he was from a rich Aryan family, could have had an easy time rationalizing that fifteen-year spell, and instead chose to— I've never read M.D.'
's response.
Yeah.
You ought to read his prison letters.
Okay.
He was killed by Hitler just before Hitler killed himself.
Really?
Yeah.
He had to get rid of Bonhoeffer.
Why?
He kept him in a concentration camp for years.
Well, because he was an anti-Nazi.
Why did he have to kill him at the end?
Because I think this was his way of trying to kill off the good that he was trying to kill off on a larger scale.
At a parallel point, you notice all this resurgence of interest in Walter Benjamin.
Yeah.
Three books have come in.
First one of his writings, there's a new biography of him.
There's one of the three books that have come in.
I know there's a plot walk of Percy, but Benjamin, of course, wrestled, didn't he?
He killed himself trying to escape.
Yeah.
A great bookman as well.
Very much so.
And I think a humane critic.
I think it's a long and abiding interest in my part, constantly trying to fulfill itself through explorations, exploratory conversations with children, with their parents, with their teachers.
And what this book in particular I'm struggling with is not the moral thinking of children,
how their behavior is shaped.
And this is an important distinction.
And this is a distinction that maybe a lot of us who are interested in moral questions are to make for ourselves, even if we're not children.
Namely, do we live up to in our daily lives what we profess in our intellectual lives?
Is there a disparity, in other words, as Emerson pointed out?
is a great danger.
Is there a disparity between intellect and character?
Well, of course, the word character, the whole concept of character, is the central.
Is the central.
What is it?
How do we help build it up, not only for our children, but for ourselves?
And I guess what I'm saying is, if we want our children to have a certain kind of moral quality, if we want to shape a certain kind of character in them,
I think the task is autobiographical, not only parental.
Can you define character for a general leader?
Well, I can define it the way my father defined it once for me.
He said, character is how you behave when no one's looking.
And what he meant is that it's a kind of a rock-bottom way of behavior that you yourself basically either know or ought to know, particularly if you want to
develop it in someone else.
So, in a way, I look upon the question of character as a personal question for parents.
How willing are we as parents or teachers to confront ourselves, never mind our children or our students, with what it is we really believe in, in that way that my father was getting at, in that moment of truth when we really examine how we behave,
Not how we behave in order to impress people, whether it be lawyers or policemen or someone who has something that we want, an admission certificate or we want them to buy something from us or to patronize us, but how we behave in response to our own moral sense of what's right and wrong, if we have such a sense.
What is driving this?
Is there something that you see out there in the world today?
Well, I've seen it in my own soul.
I've seen, you know, I described my relationship with my son one day when I was taking him to the Emerson Hospital here.
And you were speeding.
And I was speeding and, frankly, sprattering people, because it was a very rainy day.
He was driving through slush as well.
But he pointed it out to me, and by the time, he pointed it out in a very nice way, but it was a very pointed way.
I mean, it was a very jarling way.
He got me to scroll down.
And then when we got to the hospital, I was again ready to start pulling rank, and I was intimidated by him.
And I thought to myself, he is teaching me something here.
And I got annoyed with him, I have to admit.
I'm not sure this is so rare.
Yeah.
I have two teenage daughters, and it is amazing.
And this is a theme throughout your work, I think, but things that we can learn from kids.
Right.
People don't appreciate the intelligence and the depth.
And the moral search of children.
I mean, what is Walker Percy about?
He's about, you know, a kind of moral search for how to live a properly reasonable life.
And a connected life, because that's the end of the movie, though.
We hand one another along.
That's a moral statement.
One of the great, great books.
And our children hand us along.
It's not only us handing the children along.
I hope parents and teachers will read it just as I'm a parent and a teacher.
It's really addressed, you know, to myself as well as to my fellow parents and my fellow teachers.
And it's based on my own struggle.
You know, my wife and I brought up three children and struggled with them and tried to
you know, learn from them as well as teach them.
Now, you have three sons, and are they all three physicians?
Is that right?
Two of them are physicians and one's in medical school.
Amazing.
And how did this happen?
I don't know!
But I— You see, but it's the example that you said, isn't it?
Isn't it pleasing?
One of them is a resident in surgery, one of them is a pediatrician, just finished his training.
Here, around here?
Yeah, he just finished in North Carolina, and he's going to, I will tell you, he's going to work in a migrant clinic, a clinic for migrant farm workers in California.
And the oldest one is learning to be a surgeon, and the youngest one is in medical school.
You know, you mentioned a Bronx Tale, a film about a Kristen Tolstoy story.
That's a whole story, a story.
Frankly, I think the book, the whole book is worth it.
Just for parents to read that story and to read it to their children or teachers with a class and then to discuss it.
And tell me about finding that story and how you recognize that it not only resonates with you but with people.
Well, that story goes back to my mother.
There's a book, a book of poems that I wrote, which the poems aren't so good, but my mother loved Tolstoy, and she died with Tolstoy literally in her hands.
She took some of his books with her to the Mass General and was reading them as she was dying of cancer in her 80s.
When was it?
This was 10 years ago.
And I took home from that hospital room her Tolstoy books.
You had them.
I had them.
She taught me to read Tolstoy, going back to my adolescence, War and Peace, Anna Karenina.
But very important, she taught me to read those moral fables.
And that's what she had with her, the fables?
Yeah, she had that.
She had the death of Ivan Ilyich.
She had Master of Man.
How much land does a man need?
So you've got this passion.
It goes from my parents.
If you read The Call of Stories, my parents, I wrote it after they died and dedicated it to them.
That was about ten years ago.
About ten years ago.
If you want to, I'll give you a copy of The Call of Stories and of the poems.
Would you do that?
Yeah, because you'll see there's a Tolstoy poem.
I'll make you this afternoon a copy of A Gentle Madness.
Okay.
Okay, then I'm going to just check my tape, so this is a good opportunity.
The note thing is, the first poem is about my mother and Tolstoy.
So the line goes from, oh dear, M. Williams and all of your mother's Tolstoy.
But you were talking about Tolstoy, and how that story, which your mother passed on to you, and which in fact she was holding, literally, while she was dying in the hospital.
And she not only handed the story over to us, but she kept on telling us that these are stories that you can live your life by.
I remember the phrase, live your life by.
But stories, and I want to get back to that, okay?
And what she was doing is she was making a connection between the reader and the moral implications of a story, but also the moral implications of reading.
Are you going to read in an abstract, distancing way and not connected to your life, or are you going to read in such a way that what you read informs the way you live?
The Call of Stories deals with, in one fashion, it's my way of addressing my fellow writers and my fellow teachers and saying, hey, this is serious stuff.
This isn't just the deconstruction of texts.
This is reading as an aspect of living.
It's amazing how reading has this whole exercise
Just within the last six months or so has really—and my book, for instance, people, when I give a talk, they say, well, this is all about the passion for books, but does reading ever enter it?
You know, that's a very good question, I have to say.
Of course it does.
We love our books.
I can't say I read 50,000 books that I—I don't own 50,000 books, but I own about 15,000 books.
But I don't know if you've been following this whole great debate on reading, turning it around.
You're here talking about the bond between—you're going beyond the author to the reader, but now we're talking about the reader getting stories that you can live by.
That you can live by.
It's amazing.
And to me, you know, reading is an act of companionship, and the literal meaning of companionship, namely with Brad, namely communion.
namely Jesus and his disciples or the Hebrew prophets.
It's Percy talking about handing one another along.
We hand one another along as writers and readers.
And a reader can get from a writer some kind of moral response that the writer may not even be consciously intending.
There may be that moral aspect of the story that comes out of the aesthetic capability of the artist becoming almost a transcendent phenomenon.
But you follow me?
Yes, I do.
And so it's almost gratuitous in the non-pejorative sense of gratuitous.
It's like grace coming out of a story.
that the reader is privy to.
But that tension, when she said to us, my mother, and my father too, live by these stories, she was doing in a sense what Tolstoy asked of himself when he wrote, what is art?
when he went through what we would now call a midlife crisis, tried to, and said to himself, I've constructed these two extraordinary novels called War and Peace and Anna Karenina, and now what?
Now we've got, as Percy and Kierkegaard would say, now I've got my whole life cracked.
What am I going to do with it?
What am I going to do next?
What am I going to do with this life, you know?
And this story specifically was given to you by your mother?
Oh, definitely.
She gave it to me, and the huge irony of it is she gave it to me among a number of moral fables that she had collected.
And then a student of mine, a college student, brought it to me because he was using it as a volunteer with some underprivileged kids in Boston.
And I said, my God, I know this story.
Very well.
What is there about that story?
It's one of many that— But it just seems to have, for you, a particular— It is a reminder that we can take for granted our own privileged life and forget how it goes for others and how it might soon enough go for ourselves, see, as we get a little older and become vulnerable.
And also it took a child to point it out.
Oh, I'll make one for you.
Yeah.
And then of course the kids are, you have the kids discussing, well what's a dishpan?
That's right.
Is this really bad?
Is this really insulting?
I guess.
Right.
And the more they probe it, then you have to say, my God, I'm learning from this kid.
And we're learning the nature of empathy, aren't we?
I think, yeah.
But maybe we're learning it from them as well.
We're learning it from them because, you know, I worked as a pediatrician in a nursery in a children's hospital.
The kids were not yet old enough to speak language.
They were eight months old, nine months old.
They'd hear a child crying and they'd stop crying.
And everyone would say, oh, God, look what's going on.
All the kids are crying.
But what was really going on is little infants hearing tears, responding with their own tears.
This is a kind of an early instinctual empathy that we're capable of.
And I sometimes think a lot of us lose this as we get older, unfortunately.
Do you feel, obviously, it's a symbiotic thing here, I guess.
We help a child.
people are in moral intelligence and we get something back.
Is there some anxiety in your part that maybe people are dropping the ball on this lately or in recent years?
Well, I look around and I see a civilized, quote civilized, unquote, affluent society, powerful, second to none in the world, and yet many moral questions in the country.
How do we treat others?
Why are there so many criminals?
Why are our jails so full?
What do we watch on television?
You were just talking about that.
Why are our movies and our television programs so riddled with violence and exploitativeness of various kinds?
What does this tell us about ourselves?
Is this what we want our children to grow up to be like?
Self-indulgence?
callous, indifferent to others, mean-spirited, exploitative economically, sexually, culturally and socially of other people.
Is it endemic to the times in which we live?
Well, I hope not.
And I think that for all the crudities
and callousness that one sees on television and in the movies and in the newspapers, in the reports that we read of what's going on in the country.
For all of that, there are millions of us, I think, who are trying to be honorable citizens and honorable parents and honorable teachers.
And those aren't news stories.
That's everyday life.
I guess I'm addressing that aspect of ourselves, the search that a lot of us have for meaning for ourselves, for our children, for our students.
You're very gentle in the book, I think.
I mean, you don't scold people.
Is that preachy?
Well, I hope not.
I don't want to start getting into a polemical posture, because in a way, it's not that I'm afraid of taking a stand on various issues.
And I have in other ways.
I've written about a lot of social and cultural issues.
And Lord knows I was in the Civil Rights Movement at a time when it wasn't so popular, you know, in the early sixties in Louisiana and Georgia.
But I think if you start scolding people, then it becomes a huge and rather unfortunate irony.
you're undercutting what I think your effort is, is to understand people and to try to persuade them of something that you think is important.
If you scold them, you won't be able to persuade them.
It's self-defeating.
And in a way, you're doing the very thing that you are morally against, namely
You're in danger of becoming abusive yourself toward other people.
If it seems that I don't question you specifically about the book, I have the book and I've read it, so I am covering other areas, if that's okay with you.
That's fine.
In fact, I'm glad you're doing that because I have stated all of that in the book.
I'm interested.
I'm afraid.
I was afraid that I was becoming preachy in the book.
No, and it's such an opportunity because of what's going on in the world.
And I kept worrying about that, and I'm worried that reviewers and readers will feel that.
No, I don't think so.
But again, I guess they want to see
If there's an agenda here, too, if there's a political—of course, you look at the blurbs, you've got a Bennett blurb, you know.
That book sold two and a half million copies, you know.
Well, I assure you that this won't.
That I know.
But it is interesting that that book sold two and a half million.
Because I think there is a hundred at first.
I think that's what I'm talking about.
That's what he addressed.
That's right.
people will feel that they've had quite enough virtues.
But, you know, here we are.
I'd like to kind of seg you to literacy, too, because we talk about stories, stories we can live by, the importance of stories.
And people wonder about the future of the book.
And we talk about television and kids finding it so easy to be, to tune into these things.
You know, reading is hard.
Toni Morrison on the Oprah Winfrey show, remember, she said, Oprah said, you have such words that we have to go over again and pause.
Did you see that thing?
No, she said.
She said, that's called reading.
That was quite an extraordinary.
It's called reading, she said.
It's not supposed to be all that easy, you know.
I think she said it in such an elegant way, too.
She said, not my dear.
I'm using that quote in my new book, by the way.
It's wonderful.
The irony is, here's Oprah making books.
She takes a book, and if she blesses it, it'll sell a million copies.
I know.
On the one hand, so we don't want to knock somebody who's helping books.
But on the other hand, she'd say, oh, this is hard.
We have to go over the words.
You know, it's reading.
Do you have any anxious moments about kids not reading or reading?
Are you hopeful that maybe the book will survive?
There's no substitute for it.
It is the most important aspect of education that I know, is that children learn how to read, and read well and fluently.
And if we're failing to do that, we are failing ourselves as a nation and as a part of the world.
Are we failing it?
Well, for some children, definitely.
Of course, I'm in a lucky situation.
I see college students who, by definition, almost learn how to read.
But not always.
Maybe at Harvard.
Yeah, I know.
And this is important.
But then, you know, there's something else that's also important.
Those who can read, and read well, but don't take to heart what they read.
Take to heart what they read.
Those who can read and read well and read at an abstract, distanced posture and don't take to heart what they read.
And that is, in a way, even worse.
If it's possible for something to be worse than a non-reader, that would be my nomination.
The person who can read well and doesn't take it to heart and doesn't try to live by it.
What do you see now?
Of course, you work with college students, which is, you've worked in elementary schools.
You've worked, as you pointed out earlier, and as you've documented so wonderfully in your books with kids from every, what do you see?
I see a lot.
There is a passion for books, though, isn't there?
There is, and I'm thinking of the ordinary classrooms all across this country where teachers are struggling every day to teach children how to read.
I've done it myself working in an elementary school.
I'm not alone in this.
Nor should we forget that if there are a number of people who have not learned how to read, most of us do learn how to read, I would like us to teach ourselves and our children, our sons and daughters and our students, not only how to read, but an attitude toward reading.
I'm glad you didn't say what to read.
You could have said that right there.
I couldn't.
Did you think about saying that?
No.
See, you're hitting on a very critical matter that I didn't say that.
I'm not interested in specifying a particular agenda, political or cultural, but I am interested in helping people to take seriously
what they read, and to look for its moral significance and personal significance in their lives.
And let me give you an example.
Let's take the Bible, which is the first book, and so controversial even now in American life.
You can read it literally.
You can get tangled up in
in questions of interpretation.
But there is a larger issue here.
There are the lives of the people in the Bible and what they were struggling with morally and spiritually, the Hebrew prophets, Jesus.
It would be wonderful if people not only took the Bible seriously as an act of faith or as a creedal response, but took it seriously in such a way that it influenced how they behaved with their neighbors.
how they behave with their children, how they behave with someone who's in need on the street standing there.
Think of what Isaiah might have done or Jesus might have done with a blind person, with a prisoner, with a hungry person.
And that's what I mean about a book.
If the book doesn't live in the heart and soul of the person, if it's only something that's argued about,
fought over, absorbed in order to get an A in an examination— And then quickly progressed.
Yeah, and absorbed in order to show the world how smart you are, then this is sad.
It's not doing it.
This is the difference between, you know—look,
The two things in the first page here, I quote from Emerson and I quote from St.
Augustine.
I mean what those epigraphs say.
I really do.
And I consider the epigraphs one of the most important pages in the book.
Those two, and the Tolstoy story, and the personal story of my son and me on the way to the hospital.
You know, there it is.
Well, that little boy at the end of the leukemia, who's praying for the doctors, and of course, there was a little bit of skepticism there in your part, that maybe he's really praying to keep them alive.
That's right.
Which is true, I'm sure he was.
But there's something more.
In a sense, this book is stories.
It's stories about how we might
It's a parent's story book and a teacher's story book about taking stories seriously and connecting them to our behavior.
Are you familiar with the book that was published last summer by a woman named Sapphire Push?
It was an African-American woman.
And it was kind of controversial.
I just thought it was angry.
but really they should know about it because to me the triumph of the book is this girl who's been repeatedly raped by her father she's HIV positive from her father she's had two children it's an unspeakably horrible story and yet for me the triumph was this woman works with her and teaches her how to read and it's this emerging joy and it's at a very very rudimentary level it's called push
It was a big seller.
In fact, we mentioned that you don't say what to read, but do you have a sense of this debate that's going on where Shakespeare, for instance, is no longer required reading English courses?
I do, and I find it very sad.
I can't imagine not reading Shakespeare.
Scott Turow told me of, I mentioned, I said, how do you feel about Georgetown, you know, saying you don't have to study Shakespeare, Chaucer, Milton, Dryden to get a degree in English literature.
He said, I'll give you one better than that.
He was at a dinner, he was an alum of Amherst College, and he was at a dinner, and I can use this, and I intend to, where the president was informed they had just graduated a summa quid laud, summa, in English, and this student had never taken the course
I have students at Harvard College in my undergraduate course who haven't read Tolstoy, who haven't read George Eliot, who haven't read Dickens, who haven't read Hardy, who haven't read, you know, never mind, Shakespeare.
Well, what they've read is they've studied history courses or science courses.
They've majored in certain subjects.
But they haven't had that broad general education.
The core education.
Well, the core education unfortunately doesn't address general education, because it is also specific to certain subjects.
It doesn't address that great books.
There's a range that I think is urgently needed for all of us.
And it's very sad.
You can get by at Harvard College without reading some of the most important— Harvard?
I'm astonished.
The great tradition of wisdom in literature.
Do you think it's a political thing?
I mean— Well, if someone can get through Amherst College and not— SUMA.
SUMA.
In English!
Think of what those who don't major in English, and most students don't.
Only ninety percent of Harvard College students don't major in English.
Right.
So they can get by with much more.
Actually, I'm going to find—I'd like to find this student.
I'd like to talk to this student.
That's right.
And say, what are you doing with this degree?
I would also talk to the English department.
I intend to, by the way.
Look, I go out, I do field work.
You'll see when I send you my book.
Go over that of English department.
Well, I'm very interested.
What is English literature?
You give me a degree in literature, call it cultural studies, call it anything you want, but don't call it English literature, and leave out Shakespeare.
You see, one thing that does enter into this whole debate about, and I'm going to ask you about this, about the canon debates and
That's a new word, even.
I mean, in terms of literature, the canon, we've never used that before, up until the last three, have we, up until the last three or four years?
Well, if we have, it hasn't become as significant, you know.
It's now the canon.
Black canon, the Western canon.
And you have, you know, four or five different groups argue it.
I mean, it's fighting, and it's what they teach in schools.
And you see, one thing I hear over and over is, well, literature has to be relevant.
So therefore, the suggestion is that Shakespeare is not relevant.
Oh, this is nonsense.
And you as a psychiatrist know that Shakespeare had Freud beat by 300 years.
As Freud knew.
And so did George Eliot, by the way.
If you read Middlemarch, you've got an elaborate construction of the unconscious and the way it works that preceded Freud by at least a generation.
Everybody thinks it started with Freud.
No, no, no, no, no.
He knew this.
He even knew it about Ibsen, who was a contemporary of his.
He wrote about Ibsen, and he was enormously admiring of Ibsen's psychological wisdom.
So, you know, what Freud did is took that and systematized it, the wisdom that's available in plays and in novels and in poems.
Do you feel, personally, that fiction has to be relevant?
And there were quotes around that.
I think it is relevant.
It doesn't have to be.
It is.
Because fiction is storytelling about the human condition.
And in that sense, if it's good fiction, it's always relevant, because it always connects with—we are the creature, as Walker Percy told us, of language, who tells stories to make sense of this life.
And in that sense, it has to be and is relevant.
How is it that fiction, which, you know, in the traditional
It is true.
Fiction is true.
When you talk about fiction, are you also including important nonfiction as well?
What is it about fiction?
Fiction is story intelligence.
I know what you're saying.
This disparity between fiction and nonfiction is a false disparity.
They're not antagonists.
They're not polarities.
They're different modes.
of trying to understand the world through addressing the world's particular questions directly or indirectly through storytelling.
By the way, I gave these lectures at the New York Public Library last year, and there's a book coming out that addresses this fact-fiction issue.
It was published in it.
Oxford University Press in April, and it's called Doing Documentary Work.
Okay.
But it has a whole section on fact and fiction.
And I'll make sure that you get a copy.
I'm very friendly with the people at Oxford, too.
Yeah, Oxford University Press.
They were the three—you know that series where there was public library lectures and then they made books out of them?
That's right.
And this deals with this whole issue, which meant a lot to me, to try to figure that out.
I just interviewed Paul LeClaire for my new book.
He's wonderful, Gregorian.
Yeah, he was on the book C-Span last night.
Yes, and if we only had more college presidents like him, it would be a different country.
You talk about an inspired person.
He's an inspired person and inspiring.
Yeah, I can't wait to see him.
Anyway, I'm sorry, we were talking about fiction, nonfiction.
What was the title of the book before I forget?
Doing Documentary Work.
Yeah, ask them to send you a copy.
Oh, they will.
I'm doing an interview with one of their authors, Brian Fagan, on exploration and stuff.
Because that's, if I have to say something to myself, in a way this is me coming to terms with my own work in a more, you know, direct way.
And coming to terms with storytelling as an aspect of nonfiction.
you see, as well as fiction.
I write non-fiction.
Yeah, same here.
I would love to be a novelist.
Well, you can be a novelist addressing, you know, the real world, which means you tell the story that you see versus the story that you make up.
But it gets more complicated than that.
When you make up a story, you're drawing on the world.
I mean, Walker's wife used to tell me, she'd say, Walker will go to the supermarket.
And he'll come home and he starts taking notes.
And I said, what are you doing?
And he said, well, he heard this and he saw that, and that works its way into his fiction.
Can we talk about, now you teach Hopper and Carver, I guess.
Can you tell me a little bit?
How do you know that?
I've been doing my research.
I teach a course called American Life.
It's a seminar, and I show, we read the fiction and the poetry of Raymond Carver, and there are moments in some of those stories that literally describe some of Hopper's pictures.
But again, where is the insight, the perception, I guess, is a word?
For me, just because I've always loved Hopper, and I've always loved Carver,
And one day, reading Carver, I began to think of some Hopper pictures.
And then I thought more of that, and then I thought, my Lord.
But I'm sure that Carver never thought that he was— Well, I know Tuscall of that.
And she told me, this is interesting, that he did know of Harper's paintings.
I don't think he knew about them in the way I'm teaching it, but she said that it's very interesting what she told me.
She said that the last story he wrote about Chekhov's death, called Errand, that he had seen a Harper picture of, which I think you would know if you saw it, of a movie theater, and there is a
The old people who used to put you to your seat, you know, that you'd walk in and show you to your seat, they don't have that anymore.
And there was this woman standing with her flashlight from the old days of the movies, and he got the idea from that picture that this would be the way he'd write this story from the point of view of Chekhov's death, from the point of view of a busboy in the hotel, just as
You know, Hopper is saying, these people are watching the movie, but here is someone who's working who helps them to get to their seats so they can watch the movie.
Follow the analogy.
He got an idea for a point of view of a story from looking at a Hopper picture.
But I didn't know this when I came up with this.
So it just seems to validate everything that you perceive.
Well, I guess so.
I mean, I wrote her a letter telling her about what I was teaching, and she wrote me back, and she said, well, you know, as a matter of fact, Ray... So you were right on with that.
I guess.
But even if that hadn't happened, I, as the teacher, see a certain convergence, and I offer it to my students.
But it's a perfect example of how we draw all the time from...
storytelling, be it visual storytelling in the form of a painting or a story.
Now I have something else to ask you.
Do you know about the magazine Double Take?
I've heard of it.
I don't know.
Because, you know, I edit that with Alan Harris.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I'm the editor.
Is that right?
Yeah.
I didn't know that.
And you should see Double Take because that's about storytelling, both visual and… Is that right?
Yeah.
I get out of North Carolina now.
I'm leaving next week for a couple of months.
Chapel Hill, is that where you mentioned Chapel Hill?
Yeah, that's why I mentioned Chapel Hill.
Double take.
Aren't they publishing some books now, too, aren't they?
Yes.